# Chapter 2: Preparatory Steps (November 6, 2024 – January 20, 2025)

\*\*Objective:\*\* Establish a structured, authoritative foundation that
empowers the reformation team with the necessary authority, resources,
and processes to drive significant reform across all Executive agencies.
This preparatory period is critical for setting clear expectations,
building a secure infrastructure, and implementing transparent
communication channels, all to ensure the reform effort is both swift
and accountable.

---

## 2.1 Tenets

\*\*Intent:\*\* To establish the core principles that will govern both
the behavior of the reformation team and the expectations for each
agency under review. These tenets are designed to enforce
accountability, ensure operational efficiency, promote transparency, and
maintain flexibility throughout the reform process.

### Agency Expectations

All Executive agencies will align their operations with the following
standards:

\- \*\*Accountability:\*\* Agencies are required to implement
outcome-based performance metrics and validate that their programs and
expenses align with constitutional and national priorities.

\- \*\*Efficiency:\*\* Departments must identify and eliminate redundant
processes, consolidating functions like HR and IT to reduce costs and
streamline services.

\- \*\*Transparency:\*\* Agencies must provide public access to budget
details, performance metrics, and key projects, establishing trust and
visibility.

\- \*\*Agility:\*\* Quarterly reviews and adjustments will ensure that
agencies can quickly respond to reform directives and reallocate
resources as necessary.

### Reformation Team Operations

To model the standards expected of agencies, the reformation team will
uphold:

\- \*\*Integrity and Objectivity:\*\* All decisions are made based on
data, free from outside influence or bias, particularly in contractor
and award evaluations.

\- \*\*Rapid Execution:\*\* An agile approach to project management will
guide the team’s ability to meet reform goals and timelines effectively.

\- \*\*Transparency and Open Communication:\*\* Weekly updates and
documentation of decisions ensure accountability and traceability within
the team.

\- \*\*Data-Driven Approach:\*\* Metrics and regular assessments support
evidence-based decisions and help the team refine its approach
continuously.

---

## 2.2 Identify Day 1 Executive Orders

\*\*Intent:\*\* To provide the reformation team with comprehensive
authority and resources from day one, enabling immediate action and
bypassing typical bureaucratic barriers. These executive orders are
foundational, designed to grant the reformation team the operational
autonomy needed to proceed efficiently and effectively.

1\. \*\*Authorization of Broad Agency Oversight\*\*

\- This executive order grants the reformation team sweeping authority
to access all relevant agency records and conduct comprehensive reviews,
ensuring timely and thorough oversight without bureaucratic hindrances.

2\. \*\*Special Security Clearances for Reformation Team Members\*\*

\- Immediate issuance of high-level security clearances enables the
reformation team to access classified materials directly, ensuring that
data gathering is unhampered by clearance delays.

3\. \*\*Empowered Selection of IT and Cloud Provider\*\*

\- The team will have authority to appoint a secure, compliant cloud
provider without competitive bidding, allowing swift onboarding of
critical technology infrastructure essential for the reform’s success.

4\. \*\*Establishment of a Centralized Reform Data Platform\*\*

\- This platform consolidates all relevant data, providing a single
source of truth for reform metrics, reports, and real-time monitoring,
enabling efficient data-driven decision-making.

5\. \*\*Streamlined Personnel Deployment\*\*

\- The team can deploy specialized personnel into agencies for focused
assessments, ensuring resources are allocated efficiently for immediate
impact.

---

## 2.3 Brief Departments and Agencies on AI-Assisted ZBB

\*\*Intent:\*\* To ensure each agency understands and cooperates with
the requirements for data preparation and analysis, laying the
foundation for AI-assisted Zero-Based Budgeting (ZBB). This step
emphasizes transparency, rigorous data handling, and comprehensive
support to facilitate seamless integration with the reformation’s data
processes.

1\. \*\*Categorization of Documents\*\*

\- Agencies will inventory all documents, marking them as
\*\*ZBB-relevant\*\* or \*\*Non-ZBB\*\* based on their role in budget,
policy, and operational assessments, ensuring organized data for
analysis.

2\. \*\*Data Ingestion and Storage\*\*

\- AI-enabled systems will tag and categorize agency data, providing a
highly searchable database optimized for RAG (retrieval-augmented
generation) analysis.

3\. \*\*AI-Powered Analysis of Documents\*\*

\- AI tools will scan documents for redundancies, outdated policies, and
non-financial inefficiencies, giving the reformation team a full
operational view.

4\. \*\*Physical Document Digitization\*\*

\- Agencies are responsible for converting critical physical records to
digital format, ensuring all relevant information is accessible in the
centralized repository.

5\. \*\*Agency Training and Support\*\*

\- Each agency receives training on data protocols, categorization, and
ingestion requirements. A continuous feedback mechanism allows the
reformation team to make iterative adjustments based on agency feedback.

---

## 2.4 Establish Communications Programs

\*\*Intent:\*\* To establish a structured communication framework that
allows for both internal updates within the reformation team and direct
interactions with agencies under review. By using AI tools,
communication is streamlined, task progress is tracked, and resources
are efficiently allocated to ensure time-sensitive goals are met.

### Internal Communication and Task Reporting

1\. \*\*Daily Task Reports\*\*

\- Team leaders submit daily, bullet-pointed updates on objectives,
progress, and any encountered risks, supporting transparency and
accountability.

2\. \*\*AI-Assisted Summarization and Dynamic Resource Allocation\*\*

\- AI synthesizes reports into a daily Executive Summary, providing an
at-a-glance view of key tasks and highlighting areas that require
immediate resource reallocation.

3\. \*\*Structured Reporting Channels\*\*

\- Regular briefings, weekly reports, and status updates keep team
leadership informed, enabling quick decisions and issue resolution.

### Inter-Agency Communication Standards

1\. \*\*Initial Briefing\*\*

\- Each agency receives a Project Charter to set expectations for scope,
timelines, and requirements. A dedicated Project Liaison is assigned for
streamlined communication.

2\. \*\*Regular Updates and Collaborative Check-Ins\*\*

\- Weekly progress reports and monthly steering meetings ensure
structured, transparent updates between agencies and the reformation
team.

3\. \*\*AI-Enabled Interview and Data Analysis\*\*

\- AI tools like Whisper provide real-time transcription and summary
capabilities for interviews, and the RAG-enabled system processes
cross-agency data to reveal patterns and redundancies.

---

## 2.5 Selection of IT Contractor(s)

\*\*Intent:\*\* To secure a contractor that meets the rigorous security,
technical, and ethical standards required to support the reform
initiative’s infrastructure. The contractor must be capable of managing
sensitive government data, supporting ZBB analysis, and providing
high-performance AI capabilities while operating independently from
prior federal ties.

1\. \*\*Cloud Infrastructure with High Security Standards\*\*

\- Contractors must hold certifications like FedRAMP and DoD IL5/IL6,
offering scalable, secure infrastructure with continuous monitoring and
compliance.

2\. \*\*Clearance and Compliance Requirements\*\*

\- Contractor personnel and data protocols must meet federal security
standards, with strict access controls and encryption for all data
handling.

3\. \*\*US-Based and US-Owned\*\*

\- Only contractors headquartered in the US with domestic data handling
will be considered, ensuring data sovereignty and regulatory compliance.

4\. \*\*Expertise in ZBB and EPM\*\*

\- Contractor infrastructure must support ZBB and EPM processes,
enabling precise budget tracking, performance metrics, and data
transparency.

5\. \*\*High-Performance AI Capability (RAG and LLM)\*\*

\- The contractor’s cloud must support RAG and LLM processes, ideally
in-house, or with an external provider that meets security standards.

6\. \*\*Independence from Previous Federal Ties\*\*

\- Contractors with no high-level prior federal relationships are
preferred to ensure an unbiased approach. This guarantees an objective,
reform-focused operation free from potential conflicts of interest.

\#### Contractor Selection Process

A non-competitive selection process is authorized for expedited
contracting. Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and performance reviews
will uphold quality standards, while clear penalties and incentives
maintain accountability.

---

\*\*Conclusion of Chapter 2:\*\* The preparatory phase establishes clear
tenets, operational authority, and communication frameworks essential
for driving reform. With a robust data infrastructure, transparent
inter-agency cooperation, and a rigorous contractor selection process,
the reformation team is fully equipped to execute comprehensive,
data-driven reforms across Executive agencies.
