# Federal Government Reform Plan - Chapter 3: AI-Powered ZBB and EPM for Public Sector

## 3.1 Introduction to AI-Enhanced Zero-Based Budgeting Across Executive Agencies

In a modernized Executive Branch, integrating an AI-powered platform for
Zero-Based Budgeting (ZBB) and Enterprise Performance Management (EPM)
empowers managers to create precise, data-driven budgets aligned with
strategic goals while monitoring performance through tailored Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs). By supporting cross-agency comparisons
and enabling managers to build budgets from the ground up, this platform
drives transparency, accountability, and resource efficiency across all
Executive Branch agencies.

## 3.2 Cross-Agency Document Capture and Ingestion Process

The AI platform gathers and categorizes data from all Executive Branch
agencies to support comprehensive, cross-agency analysis. This
foundation of knowledge ensures that every manager has access to the
insights needed to build accurate, contextually informed budgets.

• Automated Document Capture Across Agencies: Documents from each agency
are ingested to provide managers with an extensive repository of
historical data, current budget allocations, and program justifications.

• Metadata Extraction and Categorization for Cross-Agency Analysis:
Metadata tagging streamlines retrieval and helps managers access
relevant data and reports from comparable programs across agencies.

• NLP for Document Analysis: NLP tools summarize documents and extract
key points, making it easier for managers to understand existing
programs and spending patterns.

## 3.3 Identifying Overlapping Functions and Constituencies Across Agencies

The platform’s ability to identify overlapping functions across agencies
allows managers to optimize resource use by eliminating redundancies.
This insight ensures that managers are not duplicating efforts or
allocating resources to functions already covered elsewhere.

• Cross-Agency Document Similarity and Overlap Detection: AI-driven
similarity analysis highlights programs with similar mandates, enabling
managers to make informed budgeting decisions and avoid redundant
spending.

• Function and Constituency Clustering Across Agencies: Managers can
view function maps across agencies, revealing areas of shared service
delivery or common constituencies.

• Redundancy Scoring and Impact Assessment: Redundancy scores highlight
areas where consolidation might streamline operations, helping managers
make more efficient, impactful budget decisions.

## 3.4 Building Budgets and Assigning KPIs with AI Support

The AI platform is also a practical tool for managers, simplifying the
budget-building process and facilitating the establishment of relevant
KPIs within the EPM framework. This capability ensures that each program
not only has a well-justified budget but also includes measurable goals
aligned with broader agency objectives.

1\. AI-Assisted Budget Creation: Managers can build their budgets from
the ground up, with AI providing recommended allocations based on
historical spending patterns, current strategic goals, and cost
benchmarks from comparable programs.

• Guided Expense Justification: The platform prompts managers to justify
each budget item, using AI to suggest similar past justifications and
help build strong cases for necessary expenditures.

• Predictive Budget Forecasting: AI models project future resource needs
based on agency goals, seasonal trends, or population growth, allowing
managers to forecast and plan more accurately.

2\. Simplified KPI Assignment for Performance Tracking: Within the EPM
framework, managers can define and monitor Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs) relevant to their department’s objectives and resource
allocation.

• Customizable KPI Templates: AI provides customizable templates and
suggested KPIs based on program objectives, enabling managers to set
measurable, outcome-focused targets.

• Automated KPI Tracking and Reporting: The platform continuously
monitors KPI progress, generating real-time reports and dashboards that
reflect program performance, helping managers make timely adjustments.

• Benchmarking with Cross-Agency Comparisons: The platform compares KPI
performance across similar programs in other agencies, offering managers
a benchmark to evaluate the effectiveness of their programs relative to
others.

3\. Enhanced Decision Support Through EPM Analytics: EPM analytics help
managers assess program performance throughout the budget cycle,
enabling proactive decision-making.

• Scenario Planning and Impact Analysis: The AI platform allows managers
to model different budget scenarios, assessing how resource adjustments
may impact program outcomes and aligning with changing agency
priorities.

• Automated Alerts for KPI Deviations: The platform alerts managers if a
KPI is underperforming, prompting early intervention and reallocation if
necessary to ensure programs meet performance standards.

## 3.5 Decision Support for Cross-Agency Consolidation and Disbanding

In addition to supporting budget creation and KPI tracking, the AI
platform offers valuable recommendations for consolidating or disbanding
redundant programs across agencies:

• AI-Driven Recommendations for Consolidation: The platform suggests
consolidation options when multiple agencies perform overlapping
functions, providing clear benefits such as cost savings and enhanced
service delivery.

• Strategic Priority Matching Across Agencies: The platform ensures that
each program aligns with overarching strategic priorities, helping
managers focus resources on high-impact areas.

• Cross-Agency Scenario Modeling and Impact Forecasting: Managers can
evaluate the potential effects of consolidation through scenario
modeling, understanding the operational, financial, and service delivery
impacts before making final decisions.

## 3.6 Benefits of AI-Driven ZBB and EPM Integration Across the Executive Branch

With an AI-powered platform for ZBB and EPM, managers across the
Executive Branch gain a comprehensive, data-informed toolkit for
building budgets, setting KPIs, and improving accountability:

• Simplified Budgeting with Strategic Alignment: The AI platform
streamlines budget building and ensures that each budget item aligns
with agency and federal priorities.

• Enhanced KPI Tracking for Transparency and Accountability: Automated
tracking and real-time reporting provide a clear picture of performance,
making it easier for managers to stay accountable to their KPIs.

• Data-Driven Insights Across Agencies: Real-time cross-agency insights
give managers the information needed to benchmark and optimize resource
allocation, enhancing efficiency.

• Flexibility and Responsiveness: Continuous feedback and automated
adjustments ensure that budgets and KPIs remain agile, adaptable to
changing needs across the Executive Branch.

## Conclusion

The AI-powered ZBB and EPM platform is a transformative tool for
managers across the Executive Branch, equipping them to create precise,
justified budgets aligned with strategic priorities and backed by
meaningful KPIs. By leveraging AI for budget creation, performance
tracking, and cross-agency comparisons, the platform fosters a culture
of transparency, accountability, and continuous improvement. Through
this integration, the federal government can achieve a more streamlined,
data-driven approach to resource management, better serving the public
and reinforcing trust in government operations.
